# Generational Abuse

I still remember it, sitting on the living room floor in front of an old tube television watching cartoons. I hear my dad come out of his bedroom and I didn't expect what happened next. Suddenly, I felt the crack of a belt on my back. This had to be the worst pain I'd ever had felt and the most memorable of any pain I have ever felt, even 'til this day. At that moment, my first thought was "What have I done wrong? Did I forget something? What did I do? This must be my fault". Sadly these questions were on my mind way too often.

My relationship with my dad was strange, at least to me. Every year during the summer months I would stay with my dad, who lived in a city about 2.5 hours away from my home in St. Louis, MO. During the school year, I would live at home with my mom, step-dad, and 4 siblings, but when the summer came it was time to spend with dad. Every time this came along, I was excited. I had spent 9 or more months away, and now it was the time to be with my dad. I always wanted the same things.

We would constantly go swimming, see movies at the theatre, watch movies at home, read books, among many other fun things we would do together. He gave me my first bike, taught me how to read, and do basic math before I was even in preschool. You wouldn't believe it, but I honestly think he has every single episode of The Three Stooges recorded on VHS. We loved that show. We would stay up late at night just watching the show, while I laughed nearly until I coughed my guts up. Before bed we would pray The Lord's Model Prayer. "Our Father, who art in heaven, hollowed be thy name..." He would tuck me into bed, turn out the light while leaving the bathroom light on, because I was afraid of the dark. There were plenty of good days, but the bad ones outweighed them all. But the story of my abuse didn't start with me.

That abuse, started when my dad was about 13 years old. As a child growing up with plenty of siblings, in total my grandmother had 17 children. One of my uncles, my dad's little brother, was not only his brother, but also one of his best friends. They enjoyed playing games, and just having fun as the kids they were. One day their play would turn tragic. While they were walking down the street and playing at the same time, his little brother ran into the middle of street. A truck was coming at the same time, and tragedy struck. A few weeks later, another tragedy occurred.

My dad went to visit his father. This man was also his little brother's father as well. On that day, my dad's visit was short. As his dad looked at him, and told him, "I'm not your father. Leave my house and don't come back." That would be the last time my father would see him for over 30 years, and during that time, my father had experienced an emotional abuse that stayed with him even though his abuser wasn't in front of him. His abuser didn't hit him physically. He never raised his voice, but his abuser was with him at all times. Then the questions came, "what have I done wrong? Did I forget something? What did I do? This must be my fault".

Let me make this clear. I'm not justifying what my father did. But rather, I'm explaining how these things continue with generations. Abuse is a generational and cyclical atrocity. It starts with one occurrence. Something that devastates one party, it comes from a place of pain, emotional distress, anxiety, and confusion. My pastor, who is also my mentor always says, "Hurt people, hurt people." Meaning, people who are in pain, this can be emotional or spiritual pain, their pain has a high probability of hurting someone else. Let's take my dad for example.

My Dad, even before I was born, was still dealing with the rejection of his father from when he was thirteen. I was born when he was 31. That's 18 years! 18 years of pain! 18 years of rejection! 18 years dealing with something that he himself had no control of. His father had been abusing him for 18 years, emotionally before I was even born. The questions that must have been in his mind. Does he love me? Did he ever love me? How is he doing now? Would he accept me if I came back? What would he say if I called? The questions would have no end. All of this pain in the man I call my dad. The genesis of the pain I would experience years later, had it's roots in the pain my grandfather dealt to my father.

The abuse didn't start immediately. There was correct discipline given when discipline was needed at times. I can recall, while staying with my dad one summer, before he would go to work he would take me to his neighbor's house. An old man, who reminded me a little of Fred Sanford from Sanford & Sons. The man collected pennies. I don't know what was so special about pennies but he had TONS of them! One day, the thought came across my mind, "I want some candy. I could take 5 pennies and get me some candy. He'll never know." The crazy thing was, I was right. I quietly reached my hand, and counted out 5 pennies. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, put them in my pocket and acted like I never did anything.

Well, my dad shows up to pick me up. We have to take a walk to handle some other business of his, and on the way I say, "Daddy, can we go to the store so I can get some candy?" If I remember correctly, the first thing he says, is "Do you have some money?" I was excited and little scared, but I told myself, "He doesn't know anything, no reason to be scared." So, I showed him my 5 cents. He looked at me and said, "Where'd you get that?", his tone was a little sharp. I quickly responded with a lie. "On the ground while we were walking." He looked at me in anger and disappointment. Stopped and turned around and said, "No you didn't. You stole it. We're going back and you're going to apologize and give him back what's his." I was so scarred. I knew after this I had in for.

We did exactly what he said, then went to take care of the business my dad had to do. Got home, and nothing else happened. I think my dad knew that the fact I had to admit that on that day I had stolen from someone was hard for me and punishment enough. We did talk about it later, where he took time to teach me to ask for things. It's amazing how one small event can have such an impact on a child. Whether good or bad. What we do today will effect someone's future, and will have generational consequences.

I also remember the first time I seen my grandfather. My dad came to back to St. Louis. We traveled all the way to his home. Knocked on the door, and his son answered the door. We went into the house and he called him into the room. He and his wife came out and they and my dad began to talk. I spaced out a little (I was bored). I remember them starting to argue. Going over the day my dad was rejected by his father. They were asking him questions like, "If you're my son, then why'd you wait so long to come back." It was horrible. A horrible way to treat your son. I seen where the pain came from. The next time I would see my grandfather, would be almost 10 years later, while he was laying in a casket at his funeral. My dad asked me to go. I REALLY didn't want to. I had no love for the man. He had no love for me, and he surely did my dad wrong.

I can say, that through the years and the pain, I never really knew I was being abused. I knew something was wrong but I didn't know how to deal with it. I became a very depressed child. I didn't have many friends. The ones I did have, wouldn't stick around. I developed a body odor and was teased constantly at school. The most horrible thing is I didn't know I stunk. I thought kids were just being cruel, because I couldn't smell myself. When I did smell something, I would immediately try to get clean, but nothing worked. Later, my childhood doctor, suggested I go see a therapist. I still don't remember why, but while seeing this therapist a part of my life would change forever.

I seen the therapist once a week, for a few months before the event. We talked about a lot of stuff, mostly things I was interested in. My dreams, hopes, video games, art, you name it. If I was interested in it, so was she. My mom would also be in the room. Then one day she started asking about my father. If I knew him, where he was, and how our relationship was. I don't remember the exact question she asked that started the waterworks, but it came out that I was being abused. My mom was in shock, so was the therapist. After the session was over, I felt better. I didn't know what would happen next.

The therapist called some people, including my dad. She told my mom, that I shouldn't go to see my dad again until the time came that I wanted to, and even then, if something happened where it was found out that he struck again, I could be taken away and put into foster care.
We were afraid, and took her advice. That would be the last time I visited my dad as a child alone. I would still call him, and he'd call me, but the visits stopped. Other than at family reunions. I remember my dad calling me, asking why didn't I tell him I felt this way. I didn't answer. Honestly, because I was afraid. I was afraid to speak up, afraid to even say anything over the phone.

Years go by, and I remember when I was about 16 years old. My dad one day calls me. He goes through the normal talk we do, How are you? How's school? How's life? etc... Then he starts talking about our past, and he started apologizing and asking for forgiveness. What he didn't know, was that years previous I had already set in my heart to forgive him, but finally hearing him asking for forgiveness was such a blessing to me. After we started talking a little more. We started a chess game over the internet. We sent each other emails to talk because he went through a time where he didn't have a phone. Also during that time, I became horrible at answering the phone and/or returning phone calls with everyone. I still have that problem today. So we find ways to communicate with each other.

Today, now knowing how I was damaged, I want to make sure I have closed up those hurt parts in me. I want to make sure I healed, because soon I hope to have a child. My aunt, sister, and my dad are hoping we'll be having twins. But I want to make sure that the generational abuse that started in the '60s ends with me before another generation is even conceived. My dad had a major hand in this. While rebuilding our relationship, he's helped deal with those problems and stop them from traveling on to the next generation. Now the ball is left my court. What will I do? What type of father will I be? What will I instill into my child? What will I teach them?

 The pain my dad experienced stemmed form his father losing a son. It was then carried out on his other son, who carried it out with his son. Now it's up to the third generation to break the cycle. So another generation won't have to deal with again. I love my dad. I understand his pain, but this is something I choose not to pass down. And with the help of my wife we will do our best to raise children who are healthy emotionally, physically, and spiritually. Not abdicating our responsibility to discipline them, and keeping an eye on ourselves to make sure our discipline always fits the situation.